





Network Working Group                                          G. Huston
Request for Comments: 4773                                         APNIC
Category: Informational                                    December 2006


     Administration of the IANA Special Purpose IPv6 Address Block

Status of This Memo

   This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
   not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
   memo is unlimited.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2006).

Abstract

   This is a direction to IANA concerning the management of the IANA
   Special Purpose IPv6 address assignment registry.

1.  Introduction

   This is a direction to IANA concerning the management of the IANA
   Special Purpose IPv6 address assignment registry.

2.  IANA IPv6 Special Purpose Address Block

   [RFC2928] specified the assignment of the IPv6 address prefix to
   IANA.  The rationale for this allocation is:

      "The block of Sub-TLA IDs assigned to the IANA (i.e., 2001:
      0000::/29 - 2001:01F8::/29) is for assignment for testing and
      experimental usage to support activities such as the 6bone, and
      for new approaches like exchanges."  [RFC2928]

   This address allocation to IANA was intended to support testing and
   experimental activities.  A more general view of the roles of IANA
   with respect to address allocation functions is documented in
   [RFC2860]:

      "4.3. [...]  Note that [...] (b) assignments of specialised
      address blocks (such as multicast or anycast blocks), and (c)
      experimental assignments are not considered to be policy issues,
      and shall remain subject to the provisions of this Section 4.
      (For purposes of this MOU, the term "assignments" includes
      allocations.)"  [RFC2860]



Huston                       Informational                      [Page 1]

RFC 4773                   IANA IPv6 Registry              December 2006


   The reference to section 4 here is to the general technical work for
   the IANA:

      "4.1.  The IANA will assign and register Internet protocol
      parameters only as directed by the criteria and procedures
      specified in RFCs, including Proposed, Draft, and full Internet
      Standards and Best Current Practice documents, and any other RFC
      that calls for IANA assignment."  [RFC2860]

   This document directs IANA to undertake designation of special
   purpose address blocks within the purview of direct assignments by
   the IANA under the terms of the assignment criteria specified in RFC
   2928.

   This document directs IANA to open a Special Purpose IPv6 address
   registry for the management of these IANA-designated address blocks.
   Special Purpose registrations to be made from this registry include
   addresses for experimental purposes, as described in [RFC2928], and
   other special purpose cases, as documented in IESG-reviewed published
   RFCs, according to the provisions described in section 4.1 of
   [RFC2860].

3.  IANA Considerations

   IANA maintains an "IANA IPv6 Address Special Purpose Registry".  The
   registry records current IANA address designations from the IANA-
   managed Special Purpose IPv6 address pool.

   This recommendation concerns the management of the address pool
   assigned by the IETF to the IANA in July 1999 by [RFC2928], namely
   2001:0000::/23.  Following the policies outlined in [RFC2434],
   further assignments of address space to IANA for subsequent
   designation of address prefixes for the purposes listed here shall be
   undertaken only through an IETF Consensus action.  Such directions
   for assignments of address space to augment the IANA-managed special
   purpose address pool should, in the general course of events, be
   consistent with prevailing IANA IPv6 address management policies
   [IPv6-Policies].

   IANA may undertake IPv6 address designations in support of special
   purposes as requested in "IANA Considerations" sections in IESG-
   reviewed RFCs, where an address is requested with an intended use of
   the designated address block for the purpose of testing or
   experimental usage activities initiated by IETF, or for specialised
   use of the address block in a context (e.g., anycast) associated with
   an Internet Standards track protocol.





Huston                       Informational                      [Page 2]

RFC 4773                   IANA IPv6 Registry              December 2006


   The IANA IPv6 Special Purpose Address Registry records, for all
   current address designations undertaken by IANA:

   1.  The designated address prefix.

   2.  The RFC that called for the IANA address designation.

   3.  The date the designation was made.

   4.  The date the use designation is to be terminated (if specified as
       a limited-use designation).

   5.  The nature of the purpose of the designated address (e.g.,
       unicast experiment or protocol service anycast).

   6.  For experimental unicast applications and otherwise as
       appropriate, the registry will also identify the entity and
       related contact details to whom the address designation has been
       made.

   7.  The registry will also note, for each designation, the intended
       routing scope of the address, indicating whether the address is
       intended to be routable only in scoped, local, or private
       contexts, or whether the address prefix is intended to be routed
       globally.

   8.  The date in the IANA registry is the date of the IANA action,
       i.e., the day IANA records the allocation.

   The IANA registry notes, as a general comment, that address prefixes
   listed in the Special Purpose Address Registry are not guaranteed
   routability in any particular local or global context.

   IANA will not maintain further sub-registries for any special purpose
   address block designated according to this direction.

4.  Security Considerations

   Security of the Internet's routing system relies on the ability to
   authenticate an assertion of unique control of an address block.
   Measures to authenticate such assertions rely on validation that the
   address block forms part of an existing allocated address block, and
   that there is a trustable and unique reference in the IANA address
   registries.

   The proposed registry is intended to provide an authoritative source
   of information regarding the currency and intended purpose of special
   use IPv6 address blocks that are designated from the IANA-



Huston                       Informational                      [Page 3]

RFC 4773                   IANA IPv6 Registry              December 2006


   administered Special Use registry.  This is a small step towards the
   creation of a comprehensive registry framework that can be used as a
   trust point for commencing a chain of address validation.
   Consideration should be given to IANA registry publication formats
   that are machine parseable, and also the use of file signatures and
   associated certificate mechanisms to allow applications to confirm
   that the registry contents are current, and that they have been
   published by the IANA.

5.  Acknowledgements

   The document was prepared with the assistance of Leslie Daigle, Brian
   Haberman, Bob Hinden, David Kessens, Kurt Lindqvist, Thomas Narten,
   and Paul Wilson.

6.  Informative References

   [IPv6-Policies] IANA, "IPv6 Allocation and Assignment Policy", June
                   2002.

   [RFC2434]       Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing
                   an IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC
                   2434, October 1998.

   [RFC2860]       Carpenter, B., Baker, F., and M. Roberts, "Memorandum
                   of Understanding Concerning the Technical Work of the
                   Internet Assigned Numbers Authority", RFC 2860, June
                   2000.

   [RFC2928]       Hinden, R., Deering, S., Fink, R., and T. Hain,
                   "Initial IPv6 Sub-TLA ID Assignments", RFC 2928,
                   September 2000.

Author's Address

   Geoff Huston
   Asia Pacific Network Information Centre

   EMail: gih@apnic.net
   URI:   http://www.apnic.net











Huston                       Informational                      [Page 4]

RFC 4773                   IANA IPv6 Registry              December 2006


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST,
   AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES,
   EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT
   THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY
   IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
   PURPOSE.

Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.






Huston                       Informational                      [Page 5]

